How to build a Text Classification model Using BERT and Tensorflow (#5352)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/how-to-build-a-text-classification-model-using-bert-and-tensorflow/index.md

---
layout: engineering-education
status: publish
published: true
url: /how-to-build-a-text-classification-model-using-bert-and-tensorflow/
title: How to build a Text Classification model Using BERT and Tensorflow
description: This tutorial aims to build a Text Classification model Using BERT and Tensorflow.
author: bravin-wasike
date: 2021-12-17T00:00:00-17:00
topics: [Machine Learning]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:

  - url: /engineering-education/how-to-build-a-text-classification-model-using-bert-and-tensorflow/hero.jpg
    alt: Text Classification model Using BERT and Tensorflow Hero Image
---

> Text classification is a subset of machine learning that classifies text into predefined categories. Text classification is one of the impotant tasks in natural language processing(NLP). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Text classification is a subset of machine learning that classifies text into predefined categories. Text classification is one of the important tasks in natural language processing (NLP). 
```

- [Splitting labeled dataset](#splitting-labeled-dataset)
- [Getting started with BERT](#getting-started-with-bert)
- [Download the BERT model](#download-the-bert-model)
- [Building model using TensorFlow](#building-model-using-tensorflow)
- [Initializing the BERT layers](#initializing-the-bert-layers)
- [Initializing the neural network layers](#initializing-the-neural-network-layers)
- [Model compiling](#model-compiling)
- [Fitting the model](#fitting-the-model)
- [Evaluting model using the testing dataset](#evaluting-model-using-the-testing-dataset)
- [Making predictions](#making-predictions)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)
- [References](#references)

### Prerequisites

For a reader to understand this tutorial easily, they should:
- Know how to work with [deep learning models](/engineering-education/building-a-deep-learning-app-using-python/)
- Know how to use [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) and [Numpy](https://numpy.org/) in data analysis.
- Know how to work with [TensorFlow](https://www.tensorflow.org/)
- Have [Google Colab notebook](https://research.google.com/colaboratory/). We will use Google Colab because it's faster.

### Importing important packages

> Let's import the important packages as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's import the required packages as follows:
```

```python
import tensorflow as tf
import tensorflow_hub as hub
import tensorflow_text as text
import pandas as pd
```
We have imported the following packages:

- `tensorflow`:
This is the machine learning package used to build the neural network. It will create the input and output layers of our machine learning model.

- `tensorflow_hub`:
This contains a pre-trained machine model used to build our text classification. Our pre-trained model is BERT. We will re-use the BERT model and fine-tune it to meet our needs.

- `tensorflow_text`:
This will allow us to work with text. In this tutorial, we are solving a text-classification problem.

- `pandas`:

> We will use Pandas to load our dataset. We also use Pandas for data manipulation and analysis. This gives us a clear overview of how our dataset is structured.

Reviewer: Replace `This` in these sentences with `It`

Now, let's load and explore the dataset we will use in this tutorial. Before we load the dataset, make sure you download this dataset from [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1QXzFte4FulQXmgUHBAk8y6IqcCYy8An-/view?usp=sharing)

> Now, let's load the dataset that you have downloaded from the link above. Run this command to load the dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's load the dataset downloaded using the link above. Run this command to load the dataset.
```

```python
df = pd.read_csv("spam.csv")
```
Let's see the structure of five data samples in our dataset.

```python
df.head(5)
```
The output is shown below.

![Dataset structure](/engineering-education/how-to-build-a-text-classification-model-using-bert-and-tensorflow/dataset-structure.png)

From the image above, our dataset has two categories: `ham` and `spam`. `ham` represents the emails that are not spam, this is an email from a trusted source. `spam` represents emails from an unknown source.

The dataset also has the `Message` column. This column represents the email messages.

Let's see the individual value count for the `spam` and `ham` emails.

```python
df['Category'].value_counts()
```
The output is shown below.

![Value count](/engineering-education/how-to-build-a-text-classification-model-using-bert-and-tensorflow/value-count.png)

From the image above we have 4825 `ham` emails and 747 `spam` emails. The `ham` email has a significantly higher number. 

The ratio of the two categories is shown below.

```python
747/4825
```
```bash
0.15481865284974095
```
This implies that 15% is the spam emails and 85% the ham emails. This indicates class imbalance.

> We need to balance the two classes so that to reduce bias during model training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to balance the two classes to reduce bias during model training.
```

BERT will convert a given sentence into an embedding vector.

Let's download the BERT model.

### Download the BERT model

BERT models are usually pre-trained. They are available in [TensorFlow Hub](https://www.tensorflow.org/hub). TensorFlow Hub contains all the pre-trained machine learning models that are easily downloaded. 

We will download two models, one to perform preprocessing and the other one for encoding. The links for the models are shown below.

```python
bert_preprocess = hub.KerasLayer("https://tfhub.dev/tensorflow/bert_en_uncased_preprocess/3")
bert_encoder = hub.KerasLayer("https://tfhub.dev/tensorflow/bert_en_uncased_L-12_H-768_A-12/4")
```
After downloading the model, let's now start building our model using TensorFlow.

### Building model using TensorFlow

There are two types of models that you can build in TensorFlow. Sequential model and a functional model.

In a sequential model, layers are built on top of each other, layer by layer. In a sequential model, we don't have multiple inputs and outputs.

Functional models are more robust and flexible. They do not create layers in sequential order. In the functional model, we have multiple inputs and outputs.

> In this tutorial, we will use the functional approach to build our model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial will use the functional approach to build our model.
```

We will start by initializing the BERT layers.

### Initializing the BERT layers

```python
text_input = tf.keras.layers.Input(shape=(), dtype=tf.string, name='text')
preprocessed_text = bert_preprocess(text_input)
outputs = bert_encoder(preprocessed_text)
```
In the code above we are creating an input layer using `tf.keras.layers.Input` method. We will use the `preprocessed_text` as input for this layer. 

The `bert_encoder` function will then convert the preprocessed text into embedding vectors. This will be the output of this layer. The `outputs` will then be fed into the neural network layers.

### Initializing the neural network layers

```python
l = tf.keras.layers.Dropout(0.1, name="dropout")(outputs['pooled_output'])
l = tf.keras.layers.Dense(1, activation='sigmoid', name="output")(l)
```
The neural network has two layers, the `Dropout` layer, and the `Dense` layer.

> - `Droupout` layer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Dropout` layer
```

- `Dense` layer

It only has one neuron. We also initialize the activation function as `sigmoid`. `sigmoid` is used when we have output values that between `0` and `1`. In our case when making predictions, the prediction probability will lie between `0` and `1`. That's why is best suited.

We also name the layer as `output` because this is our output layer.

Lets now the input and output layers to construct the final model as shown below:

```python
model = tf.keras.Model(inputs=[text_input], outputs = [l])
```
The model will use the `text_input` as inputs and will have only one single output.

We will display the model summary so that we can see all the input and output layers used.

```python
model.summary()
```
The model summary is shown below.

![Model summary](/engineering-education/how-to-build-a-text-classification-model-using-bert-and-tensorflow/model-summary.png)

The image above shows all the input and output layers we have initialized for our model. The output also shows the total params, trainable params, and non-trainable params.

- Total params:
This represents all the parameters in our model.

- Trainable params:

> This represents the parameters that we will train.

Reviewer: Replace `This` with `It`.
